Wizard Magic Items

Common Magic Items

    Hat of Wizardry: Easy access to all of those weird, situational cantrips that aren’t worth learning permanently. A DC 10 Arcana check is trivial for the Wizard; a typical wizard will get +5 to the check at level 1, and by level 9 passes the check on a natural 1. Unfortunately, this does require Attunement and you can only attempt to use it once per day, so you may abandon this in favor of other items later in your career.
    Ruby of the War MageXGtE: Tempting for the Bladesinger, but the Bladesinger generally fights with a one-handed weapon so you have a hand free to cast spells. I would consider this if you like two-weapon fighting as a bladesinger, but remember that you still need a free hand to cast Absorb Elements and Shield and Ruby of the War Mage won’t fix that.

Uncommon Magic Items

    Arcane Grimoire: +1 to spell attacks and save DC’s. The improvement to Arcane Recovery isn’t huge, but it makes it easier to recover higher-level spell slots. You don’t get to exceed the cap of 6th level, but at low levels the ability to recover slightly more powerful spell slots is a big improvement.
    Broom of FlyingDMG: Easily overlooked, but one of the best ways to get flight for any character. It doesn’t require attunement, and has a fly speed of 50 feet, though many medium characters will exceed the 200 pound limit to reduce the speed to 30 feet, but even then 30 feet fly speed with no duration cap and requiring no action after speaking the command word is absolutely incredible. The only drawback is that you’re using the item’s speed rather than giving yourself a fly speed, so things that improve your speed won’t make the broom move faster, and you can’t Dash with the broom. Even so, I honestly can’t justify why this is only Uncommon considering how exceptionally good it is.
    Cloak of ProtectionDMG: Good on any character, but it requires Attunement and it’s not very interesting.
    Eyes of Minute SeeingDMG: Excellent in dungeon crawls. Investigation is typically used for finding things like traps, and even if you’re not proficient you almost certainly have the highest Intelligence in the party.
    Goggles of NightDMG: Crucial for races which don’t get Darkvision, especially if your party can’t cast the Darkvision spell for you.
    Headband of Intellect: By the time you can get this, you probably already have 18 Intelligence so there’s little benefit. Give it to the least-intelligent person in the party.
    Pearl of PowerDMG: Useful on any spellcaster.
    Slippers of Spider ClimbingDMG: The next-best thing to flight. Walking up a wall has all the benefits of flying out of reach.
    Stone of Good LuckDMG: Excellent on literally any character, but if you just want better defense a Cloak of Protection may be more effective. Note that ability checks include Initiative rolls and checks to counter/dispel things.
    Wand of the War MageDMG: Helpful if you’re heavily reliant on cantrips like Fire Bolt, but an Arcane Grimoire will be considerably more useful.
    Weapon, +1DMG: Helpful for the Bladesinger.
    Winged BootsDMG: Excellent on its own, but Winged Boots are more limited in use than a broom of flying, and they require Attunement.

Rare Magic Items

    Alchemical CompendiumTCoE: While the Alchemical Compendium doesn’t provide a bonus to your spell attacks and spell DC’s like the Arcane Grimoire, it’s still an amazing item with a ton of utility that may not be obvious at first. The first benefit of the item is the simplest, allowing you to draw on your growing collection of spells in your spellbook on short notice, allowing you to use weird, situational transmutation spells that typically aren’t worth preparing like Alter Self or Skywrite.

    The second benefit is considerably more complex, but it’s complex enough that it’s definitely worth exploring. The obvious use is to turn one object into another object, such as a weapon into a tool to get past an obstacle, or a block of gold into a diamond so that you can raise an ally from the dead. There doesn’t seem to be any limitation on the final size of the object or on special materials, so you can do weird things like turning a gold bar into a stone boulder or a torch into a dead mouse (dead bodies are objects).

    Even better, you can use this to sabotage obstacles, such as by turning door hinges or locks into coins. In fact, spending a charge of the book to turn random objects into money (coins, gems, or bars of precious metals all work) is a great idea because it removes a problematic object and gives you a small, value-dense object of a specific value which you can then use later to recreate that object if necessary. Unfortunately you can’t turn multiple objects into one object or one object into multiple objects (no piles of coins), but if necessary you can just melt metal together to make it a single object.
    Amulet of HealthDMG: Setting your Constitution to 19 means that you don’t need to put Ability Score Increases into it unless you’re really certain that you want 20 Constitution. Less ASI’s into Constitution means more room for feats. Combining this with Resilient (Constitution) or War Caster can do a lot to make Concentration easier.
    Arcane Grimoire: +2 to spell attacks and save DC’s. See Arcane Grimoire under Uncommon Magic Items for more.
    Astromancy ArchiveTCoE: The ability to trade prepared spells to access divination spells as-needed means that you can easily access things like Identify and Tongues without needing to keep them prepared all the time. The second benefit is extremely powerful even at a maximum of three uses per day. Use it to buff your allies saves against dangerous things like save-or-scuk effects or to debuff enemies who are attempting to resist your high-level spells.
    Atlas of Endless HorizonsTCoE: The ability to trade prepared spells to access conjuration spells as-needed means that you can easily access things like Find Familiar and Plane Shift without needing to keep them prepared all the time. Many conjuration spells are very situational and you may not need them while actively adventuring, but might want them at the end of the day or when you decide it’s time to teleport home. The teleportation effect is neat and can get you out of grapples, but the range is tiny so you may still want Misty Step prepared. You only need to hit by an attack to trigger it, so you could punch yourself (or have an ally do it) in order to forcibly trigger the teleportation.
    Barrier Tattoo (Rare)TCoE: Way better than Mage Armor and you don’t need to raise your Dexterity past 14 to still have good AC.
    Bracers of DefenseDMG: Get a Barrier Tattoo (Rare).
    Cloak of DisplacementDMG: Among the best defensive items in the game. Taking damage from any source (spells, etc.) suppresses the effect temporarily, so make a point to kill anything that can damage you without an attack roll.
    Duplicitous ManuscriptTCoE: Among the school-specific focuses of this type, the Duplicitous Manuscript is one of the least useful. While it shares the ability to change a prepared spell, you’ll rarely need to change which illusions you’ve prepared within the space of a day unless you need to break out the really unusual options like Seeming and Hallucinatory Terrain. The second benefit allows you to impose Disadvantage when creatures try to break your illusions, but it’s one charge to affect one creature on one check or save, so it’s expensive and not very effective. A +1 or +2 spellcasting focus will yield more consistent results and will work consistently across all of your spells rather than only for the maximum of three times per day where you can use the Duplicitous Manuscript.
    Elven ChainDMG: One less AC than Barrier Tattoo (Rare), but it doesn’t require attunement, so in a game with abundant magic items Elven Chain may be a better choice.
    Fulminating TreatiseTCoE: Generally evocation enthusiasts are Blasters, and have a good mix of spells that they prepare every day to fulfill their magical violence needs. But there are a few situational spells (Contingency, etc.) which you may need to cast once but don’t want to keep prepared when you walk into a fight, so trading a spell can be very helpful. The secondary benefit adds a small amount of damage against a single target and knocks them prone. Considering the book’s rarity, that’s a fairly minor benefit most of the time. But remember that knocking a flying foe prone causes them to fall unless they can hover, and since the effect doesn’t allow a save you can add it to Magic Missile and knock flying foes out of the air unerringly. Imagine casting Magic Missile at first level and causing an ancient dragon to fall and take a mountain of falling damage.
    Heart Weaver’s PrimerTCoE: An absolute must for an enchantment enthusiast, the Heart Weaver’s Primer’s second benefit is basically the same as Enhanced Spell. Imposing Disadvantage on even one save can negate a creature as a threat. Enchantment spells include some of the best save-or-suck options in the game, and while many include additional saving throws (Hold Monster, etc.), many don’t unless specific conditions are met (Charm Monster, Hypnotic Pattern). The Disadvantage only affects one creature per charge, but that’s still enough to be massively impactful.
    Libram of Souls and FleshTCoE: If you’re working with undead you need to be able to handle them without them murdering you for much longer than 30 minutes per day.
    Planecaller’s CodexTCoE: Summon spells are fantastic, especially with the addition of the new spells in Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything. The second benefit of this item has a very short duration which encourages you to wait to summon a pet until you actually plan to fight things (normally you can do it ahead of time thanks to the generous hour-long durations), but doing so is absolutely worth the strain for the dramatic improvement in effectiveness.
    Protective VersesTCoE: Abjuration includes a huge number of situational spells like Arcane Lock, so having access to them easily is a big advantage. The second benefit applies a decent amount of temporary hit points, but I would reserve at least 1 charge for trading prepared spells because it’s so easy to spend your charges on the temporary hit points.
    Ring of ProtectionDMG: Cloak of Protection is lower rarity and has the same effect.
    Ring of ResistanceDMG: A fine item in a vacuum, but a Ring of Spell Storing full of Absorb Elements will be much more effective.
    Ring of Spell StoringDMG: Fill it with Absorb Elements and Shield, and recharge it whenever possible and this is a spectacular defensive asset.
    Sun StaffBoMT: The attack and damage bonuses are totally useless for you, and the damage reroll isn’t useful enough to justify actively trying to get one of these. The best user for this is an Eldritch Knight with Polearm Master, but they can’t attune to this without multiclassing.
    Weapon, +2DMG: Helpful for the Bladesinger.
    Wings of FlyingDMG: Broom of Flying is much better, lower rarity, and doesn’t require attunement.

Very Rare Magic Items

    Absorbing TattooTCoE: Good, but too high rarity to devote to a single damage type. Get a Ring of Spell Storing and fill it with Absorb Elements.
    Amulet of the Planes: Plane Shift for free, and since it’s an Intelligence check you’ll be able to pass it without too much trouble. If you do fail, you can use it again the next round so long as you don’t end up somewhere which would prevent you from doing so.
    Arcane Grimoire: +3 to spell attacks and save DC’s. See Arcane Grimoire under Uncommon Magic Items for more.
    Barrier Tattoo (Very Rare)TCoE: The fixed AC matches full plate, so you don’t need to worry about Dexterity to boost your AC and you don’t even suffer Disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
    Crystalline ChronicleTCoE: By the time you’re high enough level to get this item, the 100gp cap won’t be especially helpful. You do get to pretend to know three additional cantrips, which is nice, but at this level you really need this to be better.
    Deck of OraclesBoMT: Basically Portent once per day, plus one free casting of Divination once per day. Excellent on literally any character.
    Manual of Bodily HealthDMG: Permanent Constitution bonus and raises your cap by 2. Unless you’re using a magic item that fixes your Constitution as a specific score, this is excellent.
    Rod of Hellish FlamesBoMT: The damage resistances are nice, but you’re here for the ability to maximize fire or necrotic damage once per day. Easily missed but very important: It’s not “the first damage roll” like most similar effects. You simply don’t roll damage. That means that this works with spells that do repeated or ongoing damage such as Dragon Breath, Fire Shield, Hex, Illusory Dragon, Scorching Ray, Spirit Shroud, and Wall of Fire. Yes, it’s only once per day, but you can get a ton of mileage out of that single use. Not all of those are on your spell list, but I really want you to understand the possibilities here.
    Spellguard ShieldDMG: Basically only useful against spellcasters, but if you’re facing a spellcaster there are few better defenses.
    Staff of FireDMG: Good go-to spells a few times per day.
    Staff of IceDMG: Decent spells, but knowing Fireball and Wall of Force makes the best options on the staff obsolete.
    Staff of PowerDMG: A +2 quarterstaff, +2 to spell attacks (though not to spell DC’s for some reason, so you may want another focus), +2 to both AC and to saving throws, 20 charges, and 9 spells which you can cast. This is powerful, versatile, and all around just an exceptionally powerful item.
    Tome of Clear ThoughtDMG: Permanent Intelligence bonus and raises your cap by 2.
    Weapon, +3DMG: Helpful for the Bladesinger.

Legendary Magic Items

    Cloak of InvisibilityDMG: Invisibility is extremely powerful in 5e. Note that this is just the invisible condition, not the spell spell Invisibility, so you can still attack or whatever while invisible. Unless you’re playing a Defender and actively trying to draw attacks away from your allies, this is absolutely amazing.
    Ioun Stone (Mastery)DMG: Proficiency Bonuses apply to a lot of things and a +1 bonus goes a long way. Attacks, saves, skills, etc. all benefit. However, most wizards rely mostly on spells which require saving throws so it’s not as beneficial as it would be for other characters. A Stone of Good Luck may be just as useful.
    Orb of SkoraeusGotG: Darkvision, see in magical darkness, a bonus to saves to maintain concentration, and mitigate 300gp of material component costs per day. This feels very tempting, but it’s just not good enough for this rarity. By this level, 300gp is a pittance, and you have access to magical options that make magical darkness much less of a problem.
    Ring of Spell TurningDMG: Given the choice, I would much rather have a Mantle of Spell Resistance simply because the Ring of Spell Turning doesn’t provide any protection against area effect spells. Otherwise, this is a really fun item, and if it provided Advantage on saves against area of effect spells it would shoot straight up to blue.
    Ring of Three WishesDMG: Learn Wish and give this to someone in your party who can’t cast spells so that they can use it to give everyone permanent damage resistance.

    For more help with Wish, see my Practical Guide to Wish.

    Robe of the ArchmagiDMG: Combine the benefits of a Very Rare spellcasting focus, a Barrier Tattoo (Rare), and a Mantle of Spell Resistance. Those are three absolutely fantastic items, and combining them on one item is spectacular.
    Scarab of ProtectionDMG: An upgrade from the Mantle of Spell Resistance, the Scarab of Protection adds a limited benefit against necromancy and undead creatures, and doesn’t take up your cloak slot, leaving you free to take items like a Cloak of Protection or Cloak of Invisibility instead.
    Spindle of FateBoMT: The third bullet is why you’re here. Force a creature to auto-fail a save up to twice per day. Perfect for all those awesome save-or-suck spells rendered useless by targeting Con saves.
    Staff of the MagiDMG: Mostly an upgrade from the Staff of Power, the Staff of the Magi is a +2 quarterstaff and adds +2 to spell attacks (though not to spell DC’s for some reason, so you may want another focus), but loses the Staff of Power’s AC and saving throw bonuses, though you do get Advantage on saves against spells. You get a massive pool of charges and 20 spells that you can cast, 6 of which can be cast without spending charges. You can also absorb spells which other creatures cast, allowing you to turn those spells into charges in the staff and recharge it faster than you could simply by waiting for dawn. This is a great way to recharge the staff before a long rest if you have allies whose spell slots would otherwise go unspent. Strangely, this mechanic allows you to absorb cantrips, but since they’re 0-level spells they don’t charge the staff. It’s like drinking an empty glass of water.
    Tome of the Stilled TongueDMG: In addition to serving as a spellbook and a casting focus, this allows you to cast one spell without spending a spell slot. There’s no restriction on the level of the spell, so in a practical sense you get to cast a 9th-level spell once per day for free as a Bonus Action with no somatic/verbal components. You don’t need to have the spell prepared, either, so you have access to everything in your spell book at a moment’s notice. Of course, realistically you’re going to cast Wish if you want anything except a 9th-level spell, so the ability to cast any spell in your spellbook only matters if you somehow find this below level 17.
